## 1. 前言

The central artifacts in Spring’s new Java-configuration support are `@Configuration`-annotated classes and `@Bean`-annotated methods.

- The `@Bean` annotation is used to indicate that a method instantiates, configures, and initializes a new object to be managed by the Spring IoC container.

- Annotating a class with `@Configuration` indicates that its primary purpose is as a source of bean definitions. Furthermore, `@Configuration` classes let inter-bean dependencies be defined by calling other `@Bean` methods in the same class.

- 以下两者等价：

    - 代码配置

        ```java
        @Configuration
        public class AppConfig {
        
            @Bean
            public MyService myService() {
                return new MyServiceImpl();
            }
        }
        ```

    - XML配置

        ```xml
        <beans>
            <bean id="myService" class="com.acme.services.MyServiceImpl"/>
        </beans>
        ```

When `@Configuration` classes are provided as input, the `@Configuration` class itself is registered as a bean definition and all declared `@Bean` methods within the class are also registered as bean definitions.

When `@Component` and JSR-330 classes are provided, they are registered as bean definitions, and it is assumed that DI metadata such as `@Autowired` or `@Inject` are used within those classes where necessary.

## 2. Full @Configuration vs “lite” @Bean mode?

When `@Bean` methods are declared within classes that are not annotated with `@Configuration`, they are referred to as being processed in a “lite” mode. 

Unlike full `@Configuration`, lite `@Bean` methods cannot declare inter-bean dependencies. 

- Such a `@Bean` method should therefore not invoke other `@Bean` methods. Each such method is literally only a factory method for a particular bean reference, without any special runtime semantics. 
- The positive side-effect here is that no CGLIB subclassing has to be applied at runtime, so there are no limitations in terms of class design (that is, the containing class may be `final` and so forth).

In common scenarios, `@Bean` methods are to be declared within `@Configuration` classes, ensuring that “full” mode is always used and that cross-method references therefore get redirected to the container’s lifecycle management. 

## 3. 构建IoC容器

### 3.1 实例化IoC容器——AnnotationConfigApplicationContext

> 两种方式。

In much the same way that Spring XML files are used as input when instantiating a `ClassPathXmlApplicationContext`, you can use `@Configuration` classes as input when instantiating an `AnnotationConfigApplicationContext`.

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    ApplicationContext ctx = new AnnotationConfigApplicationContext(AppConfig.class);
    MyService myService = ctx.getBean(MyService.class);
    myService.doStuff();
}
```

You can instantiate an `AnnotationConfigApplicationContext` by using a no-arg constructor and then configure it by using the `register()` method.

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    AnnotationConfigApplicationContext ctx = new AnnotationConfigApplicationContext();
    ctx.register(AppConfig.class, OtherConfig.class);
    ctx.register(AdditionalConfig.class);
    ctx.refresh();
    MyService myService = ctx.getBean(MyService.class);
    myService.doStuff();
}
```

### 3.2 设置包扫描路径

除了在@Configuration配置类上使用@Component注解外，也可以使用 `AnnotationConfigApplicationContext` 暴露的`scan(String...)`方法。以下两种方式等价：

- 注解：

    ```java
    @Configuration
    @ComponentScan(basePackages = "com.acme") 
    public class AppConfig  {
        // ...
    }
    ```

- scan方法：

    ```java
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        AnnotationConfigApplicationContext ctx = new AnnotationConfigApplicationContext();
        ctx.scan("com.acme");
        ctx.refresh();
        MyService myService = ctx.getBean(MyService.class);
    }
    ```

    > Remember that `@Configuration` classes are [meta-annotated](https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/current/reference/html/core.html#beans-meta-annotations) with `@Component`, so they are candidates for component-scanning. 
    >
    > In the preceding example, assuming that `AppConfig` is declared within the `com.acme` package (or any package underneath), it is picked up during the call to `scan()`. Upon `refresh()`, all its `@Bean` methods are processed and registered as bean definitions within the container.

### 3.3 AnnotationConfigWebApplicationContext

A `WebApplicationContext` variant of `AnnotationConfigApplicationContext` is available with `AnnotationConfigWebApplicationContext`. You can use this implementation when configuring the Spring `ContextLoaderListener` servlet listener, Spring MVC `DispatcherServlet`, and so forth.

## 4. @Configuration

@Configuration is a class-level annotation indicating that an object is a source of bean definitions.

```java
@Target({ElementType.TYPE})
@Retention(RetentionPolicy.RUNTIME)
@Documented
@Component
public @interface Configuration {
    @AliasFor(
        annotation = Component.class
    )
    String value() default "";

    boolean proxyBeanMethods() default true;
}
```

Remember that @Configuration classes are ultimately only another bean in the container: This means that they can take advantage of `@Autowired` and `@Value` injection and other features the same as any other bean.

## 5. @Profile, @Conditional

It is often useful to conditionally enable or disable a complete `@Configuration` class or even individual `@Bean` methods, based on some arbitrary system state. 

One common example of this is to use the `@Profile` annotation to activate beans only when a specific profile has been enabled in the Spring `Environment` (see [Bean Definition Profiles](https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/current/reference/html/core.html#beans-definition-profiles) for details).

The `@Profile` annotation is actually implemented by using a much more flexible annotation called `@Conditional`. The `@Conditional` annotation indicates specific `org.springframework.context.annotation.Condition` implementations that should be consulted before a `@Bean` is registered.

```java
package org.springframework.context.annotation;

@Target({ElementType.TYPE, ElementType.METHOD})
@Retention(RetentionPolicy.RUNTIME)
@Documented
@Conditional({ProfileCondition.class})
public @interface Profile {
    String[] value();
}
```

```java
package org.springframework.context.annotation;

@Target({ElementType.TYPE, ElementType.METHOD})
@Retention(RetentionPolicy.RUNTIME)
@Documented
public @interface Conditional {
    Class<? extends Condition>[] value();
}
```

